---
order: 40
---
## 확인되지 않은 예외 - 논란의 여지가 있음

Java 프로그래밍 언어에는 Unchecked Exception([`RuntimeException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/RuntimeException.html), [`Error`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Error.html) 및 그 서브클래스)를 잡거나 지정하는 메서드가 필요하지 않으므로 프로그래머는  Exception만 던지는 코드를 작성하거나 모든 예외 서브클래스가 [`RuntimeException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/RuntimeException.html)에서 상속되도록 하고 싶은 유혹을 받을 수 있습니다. 이 두 가지 단축키를 사용하면 프로그래머는 컴파일러 오류에 신경 쓰지 않고 예외를 지정하거나 잡는 데 신경 쓰지 않고 코드를 작성할 수 있습니다. 프로그래머에게는 편리해 보일 수 있지만 catch 또는 specify 요구 사항의 의도를 회피하고 클래스를 사용하는 다른 사용자에게 문제를 일으킬 수 있습니다.

설계자가 메서드에 그 범위 내에서 던질 수 있는 잡히지 않은 검사 예외를 모두 지정하도록 한 이유는 무엇일까요? 메서드가 던질 수 있는 모든 [`Exception`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Exception.html)은 메서드의 공용 프로그래밍 인터페이스의 일부입니다. 메서드를 호출하는 사람은 메서드가 던질 수 있는 예외에 대해 알고 있어야 예외에 대해 어떻게 처리할지 결정할 수 있습니다. 이러한 예외는 매개변수 및 반환값만큼이나 해당 메서드의 프로그래밍 인터페이스의 일부입니다.

다음 질문은 다음과 같을 수 있습니다: "메서드가 던질 수 있는 예외를 포함하여 메서드의 API를 문서화하는 것이 그렇게 좋다면 런타임 예외도 명시하지 않는 이유는 무엇인가요?"라는 질문입니다. 런타임 예외는 프로그래밍 문제로 인해 발생하는 문제를 나타내므로 API 클라이언트 코드가 이를 복구하거나 어떤 방식으로든 처리할 것으로 합리적으로 기대할 수 없습니다. 이러한 문제에는 0으로 나누기 등의 산술 예외, 널 참조를 통해 객체에 액세스하려고 하는 등의 포인터 예외, 너무 크거나 작은 인덱스를 통해 배열 요소에 액세스하려고 하는 등의 인덱싱 예외 등이 있습니다.

Runtime exceptions can occur anywhere in a program, and in a typical one they can be very numerous. Having to add runtime exceptions in every method declaration would reduce a program's clarity. Thus, the compiler does not require that you catch or specify runtime exceptions (although you can).

One case where it is common practice to throw a [`RuntimeException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/RuntimeException.html) is when the user calls a method incorrectly. For example, a method can check if one of its arguments is incorrectly null. If an argument is null, the method might throw a [`NullPointerException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/NullPointerException.html), which is an unchecked exception.

Generally speaking, do not throw a [`RuntimeException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/RuntimeException.html) or create a subclass of [`RuntimeException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/RuntimeException.html) simply because you don't want to be bothered with specifying the exceptions your methods can throw.

Here's the bottom line guideline: If a client can reasonably be expected to recover from an exception, make it a checked exception. If a client cannot do anything to recover from the exception, make it an unchecked exception.

 

## Advantages of Exceptions

Now that you know what exceptions are and how to use them, it's time to learn the advantages of using exceptions in your programs.

### Advantage 1: Separating Error-Handling Code from "Regular" Code

Exceptions provide the means to separate the details of what to do when something out of the ordinary happens from the main logic of a program. In traditional programming, error detection, reporting, and handling often lead to confusing spaghetti code. For example, consider the pseudocode method here that reads an entire file into memory.

```java
readFile {
    open the file;
    determine its size;
    allocate that much memory;
    read the file into memory;
    close the file;
}
```

At first glance, this function seems simple enough, but it ignores all the following potential errors.

- What happens if the file can't be opened?
- What happens if the length of the file can't be determined?
- What happens if enough memory can't be allocated?
- What happens if the read fails?
- What happens if the file can't be closed?

To handle such cases, the `readFile` function must have more code to do error detection, reporting, and handling. Here is an example of what the function might look like.

```java
errorCodeType readFile {
    initialize errorCode = 0;
    
    open the file;
    if (theFileIsOpen) {
        determine the length of the file;
        if (gotTheFileLength) {
            allocate that much memory;
            if (gotEnoughMemory) {
                read the file into memory;
                if (readFailed) {
                    errorCode = -1;
                }
            } else {
                errorCode = -2;
            }
        } else {
            errorCode = -3;
        }
        close the file;
        if (theFileDidntClose && errorCode == 0) {
            errorCode = -4;
        } else {
            errorCode = errorCode and -4;
        }
    } else {
        errorCode = -5;
    }
    return errorCode;
}
```

There's so much error detection, reporting, and returning here that the original seven lines of code are lost in the clutter. Worse yet, the logical flow of the code has also been lost, thus making it difficult to tell whether the code is doing the right thing: Is the file really being closed if the function fails to allocate enough memory? It's even more difficult to ensure that the code continues to do the right thing when you modify the method three months after writing it. Many programmers solve this problem by simply ignoring it — errors are reported when their programs crash.

Exceptions enable you to write the main flow of your code and to deal with the exceptional cases elsewhere. If the `readFile` function used exceptions instead of traditional error-management techniques, it would look more like the following.

```java
readFile {
    try {
        open the file;
        determine its size;
        allocate that much memory;
        read the file into memory;
        close the file;
    } catch (fileOpenFailed) {
       doSomething;
    } catch (sizeDeterminationFailed) {
        doSomething;
    } catch (memoryAllocationFailed) {
        doSomething;
    } catch (readFailed) {
        doSomething;
    } catch (fileCloseFailed) {
        doSomething;
    }
}
```

Note that exceptions don't spare you the effort of doing the work of detecting, reporting, and handling errors, but they do help you organize the work more effectively.

### Advantage 2: Propagating Errors Up the Call Stack

A second advantage of exceptions is the ability to propagate error reporting up the call stack of methods. Suppose that the `readFile` method is the fourth method in a series of nested method calls made by the main program: `method1` calls `method2`, which calls `method3`, which finally calls `readFile`.

```java
method1 {
    call method2;
}

method2 {
    call method3;
}

method3 {
    call readFile;
}
```

Suppose also that `method1` is the only method interested in the errors that might occur within `readFile`. Traditional error-notification techniques force `method2` and `method3` to propagate the error codes returned by `readFile` up the call stack until the error codes finally reach `method1`—the only method that is interested in them.

```java
method1 {
    errorCodeType error;
    error = call method2;
    if (error)
        doErrorProcessing;
    else
        proceed;
}

errorCodeType method2 {
    errorCodeType error;
    error = call method3;
    if (error)
        return error;
    else
        proceed;
}

errorCodeType method3 {
    errorCodeType error;
    error = call readFile;
    if (error)
        return error;
    else
        proceed;
}
```

Recall that the Java runtime environment searches backward through the call stack to find any methods that are interested in handling a particular exception. A method can duck any exceptions thrown within it, thereby allowing a method farther up the call stack to catch it. Hence, only the methods that care about errors have to worry about detecting errors.

```java
method1 {
    try {
        call method2;
    } catch (exception e) {
        doErrorProcessing;
    }
}

method2 throws exception {
    call method3;
}

method3 throws exception {
    call readFile;
}
```

However, as the pseudocode shows, ducking an exception requires some effort on the part of the middleman methods. Any checked exceptions that can be thrown within a method must be specified in its `throws` clause.

### Advantage 3: Grouping and Differentiating Error Types

Because all exceptions thrown within a program are objects, the grouping or categorizing of exceptions is a natural outcome of the class hierarchy. An example of a group of related exception classes in the Java platform are those defined in [`java.io`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/io/package-summary.html) — [`IOException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/io/IOException.html) and its descendants. [`IOException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/io/IOException.html) is the most general and represents any type of error that can occur when performing I/O. Its descendants represent more specific errors. For example, [`FileNotFoundException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/io/FileNotFoundException.html) means that a file could not be located on disk.

A method can write specific handlers that can handle a very specific exception. The [`FileNotFoundException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/io/FileNotFoundException.html) class has no descendants, so the following handler can handle only one type of exception.

```java
catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
    ...
}
```

A method can catch an exception based on its group or general type by specifying any of the exception's superclasses in the catch statement. For example, to catch all I/O exceptions, regardless of their specific type, an exception handler specifies an [`IOException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/io/IOException.html) argument.

```java
catch (IOException e) {
    ...
}
```

This handler will be able to catch all I/O exceptions, including [`FileNotFoundException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/io/FileNotFoundException.html), [`EOFException`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/io/EOFException.html), and so on. You can find details about what occurred by querying the argument passed to the exception handler. For example, use the following to print the stack trace.

```java
catch (IOException e) {
    // Output goes to System.err.
    e.printStackTrace();
    // Send trace to stdout.
    e.printStackTrace(System.out);
}
```

You could even set up an exception handler that handles any [`Exception`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Exception.html) with the handler here.

```java
// A (too) general exception handler
catch (Exception e) {
    ...
}
```

The [`Exception`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Exception.html) class is close to the top of the [`Throwable`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Throwable.html) class hierarchy. Therefore, this handler will catch many other exceptions in addition to those that the handler is intended to catch. You may want to handle exceptions this way if all you want your program to do, for example, is print out an error message for the user and then exit.

In most situations, however, you want exception handlers to be as specific as possible. The reason is that the first thing a handler must do is determine what type of exception occurred before it can decide on the best recovery strategy. In effect, by not catching specific errors, the handler must accommodate any possibility. Exception handlers that are too general can make code more error-prone by catching and handling exceptions that weren't anticipated by the programmer and for which the handler was not intended.

As noted, you can create groups of exceptions and handle exceptions in a general fashion, or you can use the specific exception type to differentiate exceptions and handle exceptions in an exact fashion.

 

## Summary

A program can use exceptions to indicate that an error occurred. To throw an exception, use the `throw` statement and provide it with an exception object — a descendant of [`Throwable`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Throwable.html) — to provide information about the specific error that occurred. A method that throws an uncaught, checked exception must include a `throws` clause in its declaration.

A program can catch exceptions by using a combination of the `try`, `catch`, and `finally` blocks.

- The `try` block identifies a block of code in which an exception can occur.
- The `catch` block identifies a block of code, known as an exception handler, that can handle a particular type of exception.
- The `finally` block identifies a block of code that is guaranteed to execute, and is the right place to close files, recover resources, and otherwise clean up after the code enclosed in the try block.

The `try` statement should contain at least one `catch` block or a `finally` block and may have multiple `catch` blocks.

The class of the exception object indicates the type of exception thrown. The exception object can contain further information about the error, including an error message. With exception chaining, an exception can point to the exception that caused it, which can in turn point to the exception that caused it, and so on.

---
Last update: September 14, 2021